REOrdering Patches Improves Vision Models
Declan Kutscher1 David M. Chan2 Yutong Bai2 Trevor Darrell2 Ritwik Gupta2
1University of Pittsburgh 2University of California, Berkeley
Abstract
Sequence models such as transformers require inputs to be represented as one-
dimensional sequences. In vision, this typically involves flattening images using
a fixed row-major (raster-scan) order. While full self-attention is permutation-
equivariant, modern long-sequence transformers increasingly rely on architectural
approximations that break this invariance and introduce sensitivity to patch ordering.
We show that patch order significantly affects model performance in such settings,
with simple alternatives like column-major or Hilbert curves yielding notable
accuracy shifts. Motivated by this, we proposeREOrder, a two-stage framework for
discovering task-optimal patch orderings. First, we derive an information-theoretic
prior by evaluating the compressibility of various patch sequences. Then, we learn a
policy over permutations by optimizing a Plackett-Luce policy using REINFORCE.
This approach enables efficient learning in a combinatorial permutation space.
REOrderimproves top-1 accuracy over row-major ordering on ImageNet-1K by
up to3.01%and Functional Map of the World by13.35%.
1 Introduction
Autoregressive sequence models have become the backbone of leading systems in both language and
vision. These models operate on images by first converting their 2-D grid structure into a 1-D sequence
of patches. Conventionally, a row-major order is used for this linearization under the assumption that
full self-attention is utilized by the model. As self-attention, augmented with positional embeddings,
is permutation-equivariant, the exact patch order has been treated as inconsequential.
However, this assumption does not hold in the context of modern, long-sequence models which
introduce strong inductive biases such as locality [ 1], recurrence [ 2], or input-dependent state
dynamics [3] that are sensitive to input ordering. Through mechanisms such as sparse attention via
masking summarizing early parts of a long-sequence into latent representations, these methods are
able to model long-sequences in a computationally tractable fashion. However, these design choices
introduce a strong dependency on patch ordering, something that has previously been overlooked.
In this work, we demonstrate that merely swapping the row-major scan for an alternative, such as
column-major or Hilbert curves, yields measurable accuracy gains across multiple long-sequence
backbones. Further, we introduceREOrder, a method to learn an optimal patch ordering.REOrder
first approximates which patch ordering may lead to best performance and then learns to rank patches
in order of importance with reinforcement learning. Specifically, to convert the 2-D image into
a 1-D sequence, we first quantify the compressibility resulting from each of six different patch
orderings. Then, a Plackett-Luce ranking model is initialized with the least compressible ordering and
further trained to minimize classification loss with REINFORCE.REOrderimproves performance on
ImageNet-1K by up to 3.01% (±0.23%) and Functional Map of the World by 13.35% (±0.21%).
Code and animations are available on the project page.
arXiv:2505.23751v3  [cs.LG]  23 Oct 2025
Row Major
 Column Major
 Hilbert
 Spiral
 Diagonal
 Snake
Figure 1:Visualizations of alternate patch sequence orderings.Six different patch orders—row-major,
column-major, Hilbert curve, spiral, diagonal, and snake—are shown as trajectories over a 14×14 grid of
patches. Each trajectory begins at the red dot and progresses to the black dot, illustrating the 1-D ordering
imposed on the 2-D patch grid.
2 Related Works
Transformers as sequence models for vision.The concept of treating visual data as linearized
sequences for generative modeling and other tasks has been explored for some time, with early work
using models like LSTMs on sequences of visual frames [4]. Building on the success of transformers
in image-sequence modeling, the Image Transformer [5] adapted this architecture to single images by
dividing each image into patches and processing these patches as a 1-D sequence. To manage the
computational cost for images, the original Image Transformer employed self-attention mechanisms
constrained to local neighborhoods of patches. The Vision Transformer (ViT) [ 6] expanded this
attention approach, applying global self-attention over the entire sequence of image patches. However,
this global attention mechanism, while effective, is an O(n2) operation in computation and space
w.r.t. the number of patches, becoming computationally prohibitive for long-sequences. To overcome
this challenge and enable the application of transformers to larger images, subsequent research
has developed various strategies, including hierarchical tokenization and more efficient attention
mechanisms. Hierarchical tokenization, for instance, involves processing images at multiple scales to
reduce the sequence length at higher levels. Gupta et al. [ 7] show how such hierarchical tokenization
can be used for tractably modeling the resulting long-sequences. Motivated by this history of
linearizing 2-D images into 1-D sequences for transformer processing and the methods developed
to handle the resulting sequence length and computational complexity, in this work, we explore
whether the specific order in which a 2-D image is converted to a 1-D sequence matters for model
performance.
Long-sequence vision models.As established, the quadratic computational cost of full self-
attention with respect to sequence length makes processing long-sequences of patches very expensive
for standard Vision Transformers. To address this, significant research has focused on developing
efficient transformer architectures and long-sequence models that reduce this complexity, such as
Sparse Attention [ 8], Longformer [ 1], Transformer-XL [ 2], and Mamba [ 3, 9]. While making
modeling tractable, these methods often introduce specific inductive biases in how they process
sequences, potentially making them sensitive to the order of the input tokens (which we discuss
further in Section 3.3). In this work, we study the effect of patch ordering on Longformer, Transformer-
XL, and Mamba, demonstrating that the inductive biases inherent in these different long-sequence
modeling approaches lead to substantial accuracy variance across different patch orders.
Patch order sensitivity.Qin et al. [ 10] provided an in-depth study of the self-attention mechanism,
establishing its property of permutation equivariance. However, a comparable analysis for long-
sequence models that process vision tokens remains largely unexplored. This gap is significant,
especially when considering findings from NLP, where studies like [11] revealed that long context
models tend to neglect tokens in the middle of a sequence. Motivated by these observations and
the underexplored nature of token ordering in long visual sequences, our work aims to investigate
these effects. While some initial work in vision, such as ARM [9], has touched upon scan order for
Mamba models (settling on small, row-wise clusters), this exploration did not comprehensively cover
the wider space of possible orderings. Our research addresses this limitation by more rigorously
examining the search space through experiments with six different orderings across multiple sequence
models. Furthermore, to move beyond predefined arrangements, our method,REOrder, employs
reinforcement learning to explore the space of possible permutations for the patch sequence.
2
Learning to rank with reinforcement learning.The foundation of learning to rank from pairwise
comparisons was established by Bradley and Terry [ 12] who proposed a probabilistic model to
estimate item scores via maximum likelihood. More recent work has extended learning to rank with
reinforcement learning frameworks, particularly in information retrieval [13] and recommendation
systems [14]. Wu et. al. [ 15] assign importance scores to image tokens based on their impact on
CLIP’s predictions then trains a supervised predictor to replicate these scores for efficient token
pruning. Learning to rank patches can be reformulated to learning a permutation resulting from the
ordering of patches by rank. Büchler et. al. learns to select effective permutations of patches or
frames through a reinforcement policy that maximizes the improvement in self-supervised permutation
classification accuracy in a discrete action space. In contrast,REOrdermodels a stochastic policy
over permutations using a Plackett-Luce distribution [16, 17] and optimizes it with REINFORCE
[18] and Gumbel Top-ksampling which allows for more flexible orderings.
3 Preliminaries
We first establish the properties of the self-attention mechanism, specifically its equivariance under
conjugation by permutation matrices and the matrix multiplication that lends it O(n2) complexity.
We then examine how Transformer-XL, Longformer, and Mamba model relationships between long-
sequences and the design choices they make to side-step the quadratic complexity of self-attention.
This establishes the sensitivity of long-sequence models to patch ordering.
3.1 Self-attention and permutation equivariance
Self-attention is the primary mechanism used in the Vision Transformer. Let the n image patches
form the matrix
X= [x 1;. . .;x n]∈R n×d.
Self-attention can then be computed as
Attn(X) = softmax

(XWq)(XWk)⊤
√
d

XWv,W q,W k,W v ∈R d×d (1)
whereW q,W k, andW v are learnable query, key, and value matrices, respectively.
The n×n similarity matrix inside the softmax is O(n2) which is undesirable for large X. However,
full self-attention has useful symmetry.
Proposition 3.1(Permutation equivariance of self-attention).For every permutation matrix P∈
{0,1} n×n,
Attn(PX) =PAttn(X).(2)
Equation (2) states that self-attention is equivariant to arbitrary permutations of the patch ordering.
Hence, the Vision Transformer, composed entirely of self-attention, is also permutation-equivariant.
A proof for Proposition (3.1) is in Section B; a thorough analysis is conducted by Xu et. al. [19].
3.2 Position embeddings
The permutation equivariance of full self-attention is undesirable for image processing tasks. The
spatial arrangement of patches in an image carries critical semantic information that must be preserved
or made accessible to the model. Positional embeddings were introduced to explicitly provide the
model with information about the original 2-D location of each patch within the image grid by
summation with the image tokens. This allows the model to understand the spatial relationships
between patches, regardless of their position in the input 1-D sequence.
We use learned absolute position embeddings across our models. In Transformer-XL, these are
incorporated in conjunction with its native relative positional encoding. When a specific base patch
ordering is adopted for an experiment, the positional embeddings are learned to align with that
particular fixed sequence. Crucially, the positional embedding for the [CLS] token is consistently
learned for the initial sequence position and is not reordered with the patch tokens, thereby maintaining
a stable reference for classification tasks.
3
3.3 Self-attention approximations and sensitivity to patch order
Recent work reduces the O(n2) cost of full attention by sparsifying the attention pattern, factoring
the softmax kernel, or replacing it with a learned recurrence. These changes, however, also break the
full permutation-equivariance guarantee of Eq. (2). Below we inspect three representative models.
Their attention patterns are visualized in Section G.
Transformer-XL.Transformer-XL [ 2] adds segment-level recurrence with memory. After a
segment of length L is processed, each layer caches its hidden states as memory M∈R m×d. At the
next step the layer concatenates that memory with the current segment’s hidden statesH∈R L×d:
˜H= concat

SG(M),H

∈R (m+L)×d,
whereSG(·)is a stop-gradient. Following Eq. (1), we define a single set of projection matrices as
Q=HW q, K= ˜H Wk, V= ˜H Wv
Let P permute the L patches of only the current segment (but not the memory). Memory corresponds
to previous segments, so its rows are fixed under permutation.
P ˜H= [SG(M);PH]
Because the second and third logit terms ofMTXL(i, j) depend on the relative indexi−j , conjugating
byPdoes not commute with the soft-max:
ATXL(PH)̸=PA TXL(H).
Thus, Transformer-XL is permutation-sensitive even though its content-content term alone would be
equivariant.
Longformer.Longformer [ 1] uses a sliding-window pattern of width w plus g global tokens with
their own projections W(g)
q ,W (g)
k ,W (g)
v . Because the local mask Mlocal fixes which (i, j) pairs are
valid, applying P to the rows/columns re-labels many entries as illegal (−∞) and others as legal, so
softmax(PMlocalP⊤)̸=Psoftmax(M local)P⊤.
The same holds for the global mask unless P preserves the hand-picked global positions. Therefore,
Longformer is sensitive to patch ordering by design. It converts O(n2) complexity to O(nw) under a
rigid spatial prior.
Mamba and ARM.Mamba [ 3] does not implement quadratic attention and instead introduces a
content-dependent state-space update.
ht =A t ht−1 +B t xt,y t =C t ht,
with inputs xt produced by scanning the patch sequence left-to-right. A permutation P re-orders the
stream, changing (Bt,C t,∆ t) and the sequence of matrix multiplications, so the recurrence yield is
different. Therefore Mamba is also permutation sensitive. Its O(n) complexity comes at the price of
a fixed processing order.
In this work, we use ARM as introduced by Ren et. al. [9]. In ARM, every Mamba layer runs four
causal scans in different directionsdand sums their outputs before the channel-mixing MLP.
For each d∈ { →,←,↓,↑} let x(d)
t be the patch encountered at time step t when traversing the image
in directiond. The direction-specific recurrence is
h(d)
t =A (d)
t h(d)
t−1 +B (d)
t x(d)
t ,y (d)
t =C (d)
t h(d)
t ,
and the layer output combines the four scans via
yt =
X
d∈{ →,←,↓,↑}
y(d)
t .
Similar to Mamba, because each scan is individually directional, an arbitrary permutation P of
the patch order both re-orders the input streams {x(d)
t } and alters the learned parameter sequences
A(d)
t ,B (d)
t ,C (d)
t
	
. Hence the mapping still violates permutation equivariance y(PX)̸=P y(X) .
Further discussion in regards to the symmetry and performance implications of ARM with different
orderings is discussed in Section A
4
ViT Longformer Mamba T-XL
-8.6
-6.9
-5.2
-3.4
-1.7
0.0
1.7
3.4
5.2
6.9
8.6
 from Row Major (pp)
ImageNet-1K
ViT Longformer Mamba T-XL
-2.4
-1.9
-1.5
-1.0
-0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
1.9
2.4
 from Row Major (pp)
Functional Map of the World
Column Hilbert Diagonal Spiral Snake
Figure 2:Patch order affects the performance of long-sequence models.This figure compares the top-1
accuracy of Vision Transformer (ViT), Longformer, Mamba, and Transformer-XL (T-XL) on ImageNet-1K
and Functional Map of the World when using alternate patch orderings, relative to their standard row-major
performance. As expected, ViT remains equivariant to patch sequence permutations. In contrast, long-sequence
models exhibit substantial performance variability depending on the patch ordering. No single ordering
consistently outperforms others across models or datasets, necessitating dynamic patch ordering strategies.
4 Does Patch Order Matter?
Conventional autoregressive vision models default to a raster-scan (row-major) order for flattening
2-D images into 1-D sequences. We investigate the question of whether the sequence in which image
patches are presented to autoregressive vision models has an impact on their performance. We begin
by outlining the datasets and models used in our empirical evaluation, followed by details of our
training methodology. We then present results demonstrating that variations in patch ordering, even
simple ones like column-major scans, can lead to differences in model outcomes, thereby motivating
a search for more optimal, potentially learned, orderings. We define and explore six fixed patch
orders: row-major, column-major, Hilbert curve, spiral, diagonal, and snake. These are visualized
in Figure 1 and formally defined in Section F.
Datasets.Images captured in different contexts demonstrate varying structural biases. To study
whether such datasets are susceptible to patch ordering effects to different degrees, we run experiments
on two datasets: ImageNet-1K [20] (natural images) and Functional Map of the World [21] (satellite).
We train on their respective training sets and report results on the validation sets. Details on the
dataset licenses are provided in Section E
Models.We experiment with the Vision Transformer (ViT) [ 6], Transformer-XL (TXL) [2], Long-
former [1], and ARM model as our Mamba variant [3, 9]. These three long-sequence architectures
were chosen to represent distinct approaches to efficient sequence modeling: Transformer-XL em-
ploys segment-level recurrence and relative positional encodings to extend context length; Longformer
reduces the quadratic attention cost through a combination of sliding-window and global attention;
and Mamba introduces a structured state-space model with linear-time complexity and constant mem-
ory scaling. Together, they span the major design paradigms for long-range dependency modeling.
We then test whether patch-ordering effects persist across fundamentally different inductive biases.
We utilized the timm implementation for the Vision Transformer (ViT) and the HuggingFace imple-
mentation for Longformer. Both were adapted with minor modifications to accommodate varying
patch permutations. TXL is based on the official implementation and includes a newly introduced,
learned absolute position embedding to account for changing patch orders across batches. We use
ARM [9] as our vision Mamba model of choice due to its training stability. For all of the models, the
image size is 224×224 with a patch size of 16×16. The Transformer-XL memory length (M) was
set to 128 and the attention window size (Mlocal) for Longformer was set to 14. All four models
prepend a learnable class [CLS] token as a fixed-length representation for image classification. The
[CLS] token is always retained as the first token in the sequence. All models use their respective
Base configurations. Complete details about the model configurations are in Section C.
Training.Experiments are conducted on machines equipped with either 8 ×80GB A100 GPUs or
4×40GB A100 GPUs. We apply basic data augmentations of resizing to 256×256, center crop to
224×224 and then a horizontal flip with p= 0.5 . We ablate this augmentation choice in Section D.3.
All models are trained for 100 epochs the AdamW optimizer using β1 = 0.9, β2 = 0.999, weight
5
decay of 0.03, and a base learning rate of α= 1.0×10 −4. Batch sizes are held constant for all runs
across all model-dataset pairs (details in Section D). We apply cosine learning rate decay with a linear
warmup over 5 epochs. For the reinforcement learning experiments introduced in Section 6, we use
the same optimizer configuration but with a reduced base learning rate of α= 1.0×10 −5 and no
decay.
4.1 Performance Variation Across Orderings
We evaluated top-1 accuracy on validation sets, estimating the Standard Error of the Mean (SEM)
using a non-parametric bootstrap method with 2,000 resamples. Our analysis focused on how model
performance varied with different patch orderings across datasets.
As anticipated, the Vision Transformer (ViT) demonstrated permutation equivariance, achieving
consistent top-1 accuracy (approx. 37.5% on ImageNet-1K and 46.5% on FMoW) irrespective of
patch order (Figure 2). In contrast, long-sequence models like Longformer, Mamba, and Transformer-
XL (T-XL) showed performance variations dependent on patch order. T-XL and Mamba were
particularly sensitive; on ImageNet-1K, T-XL’s accuracy increased by 1.92%(±0.21 percentage
points) with column-major ordering and decreased by 6.43%(±0.21 percentage points) with spiral.
Longformer also benefited from alternative orderings (column-major, Hilbert, snake) on ImageNet-1K,
improving by up to 1.83%(±0.22 percentage points) over row-major.
Dataset characteristics altered these trends. On FMoW, Longformer’s optimal ordering shifted (e.g.,
diagonal increased accuracy by 1.3%(±0.22 percentage points) while column-major was detrimental).
T-XL still favored column-major but also benefited from diagonal ordering on FMoW. Overall, FMoW
exhibited less sensitivity to patch ordering than ImageNet, likely due to the greater homogeneity of
satellite imagery compared to diverse natural images. Mamba consistently performed worse with
non-row/column major orderings, likely because its fixed causal scan directions (d∈ { →,←,↓,↑} )
conflict with other patch sequences. Adapting Mamba’s scan order to the patch ordering could
potentially mitigate this performance drop.
These results highlight that there is no one ordering that works best for all models or datasets. Given
that in many cases an alternate ordering outperforms the standard row-major order, this raises an
important question: can we discover an optimal ordering tailored to a specific model and dataset?
Moreover, are there useful priors we can identify to guide the search for such orderings?
5 Learning an Optimal Patch Ordering withREOrder
The observation that patch order influences model performance suggests the existence of an optimal
ordering for each model-dataset pair. To find such orderings, we introduceREOrder, a unified
framework that combines unsupervised prior discovery with task-specific learning. We begin with an
information-theoretic analysis, examining the link between sequence compressibility and downstream
performance.REOrderautomates this process to derive a prior over effective patch orderings.
Building on this, it employs a reinforcement learning approach to directly learn task-specific orderings,
leveraging the prior as guidance.
Information-Theoretic InitializationThe order in which image patches are arranged affects the
compressibility of the resulting sequence. For example, in a conventional raster-scan order, adjacent
patches often contain similar content, making the sequence more compressible. This local redundancy
might make the prediction task more trivial, as the model could focus on learning simple local
correlations rather than capturing more complex, long-range dependencies. We first explore whether
compression metrics could serve as a proxy for evaluating different patch orderings. Specifically, we
discretize images using a VQ-V AE based model [22] and encode the resulting token sequence codes
using both unigram and bigram tokenization. For each configuration, we measure the compression
ratio achieved by LZMA, which provides a quantitative measure of local redundancy in the sequence.
In Figure 3, we observe that different patch orderings indeed lead to varying compression ratios.
The row-major order, which is commonly used in vision transformers, achieves higher compression
ratios, suggesting strong local redundancy. Interestingly, the Hilbert curve ordering, which aims to
preserve spatial locality, shows similar compression characteristics to row-major order. In contrast,
the column-major/spiral orderings exhibit lower compression ratios, indicating less local redundancy.
6
52.0
53.0
54.0
55.0
IN1K
T op-1 Acc (%)
r = -0.16
Longformer
50.0
52.0
54.0
56.0
58.0 r = 0.10
Mamba
54.0
56.0
58.0
60.0
62.0
r = -0.46
Transformer-XL
36.5
37.0
37.5
38.0
38.5 r = -0.31
ViT
17.31 17.65 17.99 18.33 18.67
Compression % reduction
53.0
54.0
55.0
56.0
FMOW
T op-1 Acc (%)
r = -0.40
17.31 17.65 17.99 18.33 18.67
Compression % reduction
42.0
44.0
46.0
48.0 r = 0.24
17.31 17.65 17.99 18.33 18.67
Compression % reduction
53.0
54.0
55.0
56.0 r = -0.15
17.31 17.65 17.99 18.33 18.67
Compression % reduction
45.5
46.0
46.5
47.0
47.5 r = -0.92
Row Column Hilbert Diagonal Spiral Snake IN1K FMOW
Figure 3:Compression of 1-D sequences can serve as a weak prior for optimal patch ordering.Top-1
accuracy is compared to percentage reduction for different patch orderings across four models for both ImageNet-
1K and FMoW.
This result highlights the limitations of applying a 1D compression algorithm (LZMA) to sequences
derived from 2D data. While Hilbert curves preserve 2D locality better, this may not translate to
higher compressibility for a 1D algorithm.
While this analysis provides a useful lens for examining patch dependencies, it produces only a
weak and model-dependent correlation with downstream accuracy. That is, lower compressibility
does not consistently imply improved task performance. For instance, while column-major ordering
in Figure 3 shows lower compression ratios, it does not consistently lead to better model performance
across all architectures. This result is itself significant as it demonstrates that no simple, universal
heuristic exists for a 1-D sequence of image tokens.
This insight motivates the second stage of our approach, in which we employ reinforcement learning
to discover task-specific orderings. We use compressibility as a weak prior to give a warm start to our
exploration. We assess the importance of such initializations in Section D.2.
6 Learning to Order Patches
Our findings in Section 4 reveal that patch ordering can significantly affect the performance of long-
sequence vision models. This suggests the potential value of discovering a data- and model-specific
ordering to improve task performance. Unfortunately, learning a discrete permutation poses a unique
challenge. For an image with N patches, there are N! possible orderings. For N= 196 , there are
more than 10365 options. Searching this combinatorial space exhaustively is infeasible. A naïve
approach would require evaluating each permutation’s classification loss on every training example,
which is computationally intractable and incompatible with gradient-based learning. We instead treat
the selection of patch orderings as a stochastic policy learning problem, where the policy outputs a
distribution over permutations. This allows us to sample permutations during training and optimize
the policy against the downstream classification loss with reinforcement learning.
6.1 Learning the Permutation Policy via REINFORCE
Because permutations are discrete and non-differentiable, we adopt the REINFORCE algorithm
[18, 23], a score-function estimator, to search over the space of all possible permutations and optimize
a permutation policy.REOrderis outlined in Algorithm 1. This formulation treats the permutation
sampler as a stochastic policy, whose parameters are updated based on the classification reward.
REINFORCE is unbiased but can have high variance. To mitigate this, we subtract a running baseline
bt from the reward, givingAt =r t −b t, where bt+1 =β b t +(1−β)r t, with β(= 0.99) controlling
the baseline’s momentum. The vision transformer’s parametersθ depend only on the cross-entropy
lossL CE, while the policy model receives gradients fromL CE and the REINFORCE loss.
7
Algorithm 1REOrderwith a Plackett-Luce policy
Require: mini-batch {(x(b), y(b))}B
b=1, backbone fθ, logits z, Gumbel temperature τ, baseline b, momentum β
1:g∼Gumbel(0,1) n
2:π←argsort desc(z+τ g)▷Gumbel-top-kpermutation
3:x (b)
π ←PERMUTE(x (b), π)∀b
4:ˆy(b) ←f θ
 
x(b)
π

5:L CE ← − 1
B
BX
b=1
log ˆy(b)
y(b)
6:r← −L CE ▷Reward
7:b←βb+ (1−β)r
8:A←r−b ▷Advantage
9:L policy ← −AlogP(π|z)
10:L total ← L CE +L policy
11: Back-propagate∇ θ,z Ltotal and update with Adam
6.2 The Plackett-Luce Policy for Patch Orderings
To parameterize the permutation distribution, we use the Plackett-Luce (PL) model [16, 17]. This
model defines a distribution over permutations based on a learned logit vector z∈R n associated
with the image patches. Each patch gets a single parameter, so a 224 ×224 image with patch size
16×16 results in a model with 196 parameters. This is negligible added overhead for training. A
permutation is sampled sequentially: at each step, a yet-unplaced patch is selected according to a
softmax over the remaining logits:
P(π|z) =
nY
i=1
exp
 
zπi

Pn
k=i exp
 
zπk
 .(3)
Sampling from this distribution naively requires drawing one patch at a time in a sequential loop,
which is inherently slow and difficult to parallelize across a batch. To make training efficient, we
use the Gumbel-top-k trick [24] which generates samples from the Plackett-Luce distribution by
perturbing logits with Gumbel noise and sorting. A policy π is sampled as π= argsort(z+τ g)
where gi ∼Gumbel(0,1) and τ >0 is a temperature parameter that trades off exploration and
exploitation. The Gumbel-top- k sampler is fully parallelizable and faster than iterative sampling,
allowing permutation sampling inO(nlogn)time.
The log-probability of a sampled permutation is computed in closed form:
logP(π|z) =
nX
i=1

zπi −log
nX
k=i
exp(zπk )

,(4)
which we implement efficiently using cumulativelogsumexpin reverse.
The logit vector z is initialized as a linear ramp from 0 to −1, then permuted according to the
information-theoretic prior described in Section 5. This gives the model a sensible starting point
that reflects structural cues discovered during unsupervised analysis, while still allowing gradients to
adapt the ordering throughout training.
During training, a single set of Gumbel samples is drawn per batch so that every image shares
the same permutation. At test time, we compute a deterministic maximum-likelihood permutation
ˆπ= argsort(z). To ensure stability, we permute only the positional embeddings of image tokens
withπ, keeping the[CLS]token fixed.
6.3 Curriculum for Policy Learning
We adopt a three-stage curriculum that cleanly separates representation learning from policy learning.
For the first N epochs the classifier is trained with the canonical row-major patch order. This gives
the vision transformer a stable starting point before any permutation noise is introduced. Beginning
at epoch N the Plackett-Luce policy is activated and trained with REINFORCE for M epochs.
Sampling uses the Gumbel-top-k trick with a temperature schedule τt that climbs to a peak value
8
Column
Row
Epoch 15 Epoch 22 Epoch 30 Epoch 37 Epoch 44
Figure 4:The logits of the Plackett-Luce model, and therefore the permutation order, changes over the
course of training. Longformer is initialized with column and row-major patch ordering and optimized with
REOrderon ImageNet-1K. The image is of the class “keyboard.” We track two patches over the course of the
policy curriculum: a keyboard key (light red arrow) and an irrelevant orange beak (dark red arrow). As the
policy learns to order patches, we see the patches move toward the back of the sequence (i.e., are back-loaded)
reflecting the dataset’s center bias.
before decaying to zero. While τt >0 the permutation remains stochastic, encouraging exploration
and allowing the policy to discover beneficial orderings. Once the temperature hits zero at epoch
N+M , sampling collapses to the single maximum-likelihood permutation ˆπ= argsort(z). The
policy gradients vanish, freezing the permutation, and the remaining epochs let the backbone finish
optimizing with its now-determinate input order.
For our experiments. the curriculum was set with N= 15 and M= 30 . τt follows a triangle
pattern where it increases linearly from τ= 0.0 at epoch N to M/2 with τ= 0.2 . It then decreases
linearly from epoch M/2 to M ending at τ= 0 . The optimizer for the policy was AdamW(β1=0.9,
β2=0.999, weight decay 0.03) with a learning rate of 1×10 −4. The evolution of the policy over
training is visualized in Figure 4, demonstrating how salient patches for the target class of “keyboard”
move to the end of the sequence to maximize classification accuracy.
6.4 Effectiveness of Learned Patch Ordering
The Plackett-Luce policy introduced byREOrderis a simple drop-in addition to model training,
and as visualized in Figure 5, in almost all cases, improves performance over their respective base
patch order runs. Mamba observes gains of 2.20% (±0.22 percentage points) on average across
different patch orderings for IN1K, and 9.32% (±0.22 percentage points) on FMoW. For ImageNet,
the Hilbert curve ordering for Mamba is improved by 3.01% (±0.23 percentage points) while for
Functional Map of the World, the diagonal ordering is improved by 13.35% (±0.21 percentage
points). Transformer-XL demonstrates modest gains withREOrder. On IN1K, Transformer-XL
accuracy improves by an average of 0.70% (±0.22 percentage points) but sees significant gains with
the Hilbert curve (1.50% (±0.21 percentage points)) and spiral (1.09% (±0.21 percentage points))
patch orderings. On FMoW,REOrderimproves the best-performing column-major order by an
additional 1.10% (±0.21 percentage points), demonstrating that simply using a basic patch ordering
alone may not be sufficient to get best performance. Longformer is unable to improve its accuracy on
either dataset. However, since Longformer was the model that was initially also the least susceptible
to changes in patch ordering due to its near-full approximation of self-attention, it is unsurprising that
the use ofREOrderdoes not achieve any noticeable performance gains.
To verify that these gains are not artifacts of training dynamics or limited training duration, we
conducted two complementary robustness analyses (see Appendix D.2 and D.1). The first examines
the role of policy-driven exploration by comparing static and dynamic random permutation strategies.
The second extends Transformer-XL training from 100 to 300 epochs to test stability under longer
optimization schedules. Together, these experiments confirm that performance improvements arise
from the reinforcement learning process itself and persist under extended training.
9
Row Column Hilbert Diagonal Spiral Snake
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
T op-1 Accuracy (%)
ImageNet-1K
Row Column Hilbert Diagonal Spiral Snake
Functional Map of the World
Longformer Mamba Transformer-XL RL Improves RL Hurts
Figure 5:REOrderfinds improvements over the best patch ordering prior in almost all cases.Across
all models,REOrdercan find a better patch ordering than a static prior and improve accuracy across both
ImageNet-1K and Functional Map of the World.
In summary,REOrder’s approach of learning a patch ordering proves to be a broadly effective strategy
for boosting classification performance with long-sequence models, consistently elevating results
even beyond the strongest baseline patch orderings for nearly all tested models and datasets. We
outline current limitations of our study and potential future directions in Section A. We also provide
a thorough interpretability analysis in Section H.
7 Conclusion
This work establishes that contemporary vision models are sensitive to patch order and that row-major
patch ordering, an extremely common way of converting 2-D images to 1-D sequences, can be
suboptimal in many cases. Architectural modifications in models like Transformer-XL, Mamba,
and Longformer, while enabling the processing of long-sequences, break permutation equivariance,
leading to significant accuracy variations with different scan orders. We introduceREOrder, a
method to learn optimal patch orderings by first deriving an information-theoretic prior and then
learning a patch ranking by optimizing a Plackett-Luce policy with REINFORCE. This learned policy,
implemented as a simple drop-in addition to model training, demonstrably improves classification
accuracy for multiple long-sequence models on datasets such as ImageNet-1 and Functional Map of
the World by up to by up to3.01%and13.35%, respectively, surpassing the best fixed orderings.
Acknowledgements
Thank you to Jiaxin Ge and Lisa Dunlap for generously reviewing this paper for clarity and content.
Stephanie Fu lent her keen design instinct and helped make the figures look pretty. Anand Siththa-
ranjan and Sanjeev Raja were always game for late night discussions about how to search over a
combinatorial space and the pitfalls of reinforcement learning. As part of their affiliation with UC
Berkeley, the authors were supported in part by the National Science Foundation, the U.S. Department
of Defense, and/or the Berkeley Artificial Intelligence Research (BAIR) Industrial Alliance program.
The views, opinions, and/or findings expressed are those of the authors and should not be interpreted
as representing the official views or policies of any supporting entity, including the Department of
Defense or the U.S. Government. This work utilized the infrastructure at the DoD’s High Performance
Computing Modernization Program (HPCMP).
References
[1] Iz Beltagy, Matthew E. Peters, and Arman Cohan. Longformer: The long-document transformer,
2020.
[2] Zihang Dai, Zhilin Yang, Yiming Yang, Jaime Carbonell, Quoc V . Le, and Ruslan Salakhutdinov.
Transformer-xl: Attentive language models beyond a fixed-length context, 2019.
[3] Albert Gu and Tri Dao. Mamba: Linear-time sequence modeling with selective state spaces,
2024.
10
[4] Subhashini Venugopalan, Marcus Rohrbach, Jeffrey Donahue, Raymond Mooney, Trevor
Darrell, and Kate Saenko. Sequence to Sequence - Video to Text. InProceedings of the IEEE
International Conference on Computer Vision, pages 4534–4542, 2015.
[5] Niki Parmar, Ashish Vaswani, Jakob Uszkoreit, Lukasz Kaiser, Noam M. Shazeer, Alexander
Ku, and Dustin Tran. Image transformer. InInternational Conference on Machine Learning,
2018.
[6] Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Dirk Weissenborn, Xiaohua Zhai,
Thomas Unterthiner, Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer, Georg Heigold, Sylvain Gelly,
Jakob Uszkoreit, and Neil Houlsby. An Image is Worth 16x16 Words: Transformers for Image
Recognition at Scale. InInternational Conference on Learning Representations, October 2020.
[7] Ritwik Gupta, Shufan Li, Tyler Zhu, Jitendra Malik, Trevor Darrell, and Karttikeya Mangalam.
xT: Nested Tokenization for Larger Context in Large Images. InProceedings of the 41st
International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 17060–17071. PMLR, July 2024.
[8] Rewon Child, Scott Gray, Alec Radford, and Ilya Sutskever. Generating long sequences with
sparse transformers, 2019.
[9] Sucheng Ren, Xianhang Li, Haoqin Tu, Feng Wang, Fangxun Shu, Lei Zhang, Jieru Mei, Linjie
Yang, Peng Wang, Heng Wang, Alan Yuille, and Cihang Xie. Autoregressive Pretraining with
Mamba in Vision, June 2024.
[10] Yao Qin, Chiyuan Zhang, Ting Chen, Balaji Lakshminarayanan, Alex Beutel, and Xuezhi Wang.
Understanding and improving robustness of vision transformers through patch-based negative
augmentation, 2023.
[11] Nelson F Liu, Kevin Lin, John Hewitt, Ashwin Paranjape, Michele Bevilacqua, Fabio Petroni,
and Percy Liang. Lost in the middle: How language models use long contexts.arXiv preprint
arXiv:2307.03172, 2023.
[12] Ralph Allan Bradley and Milton E. Terry. Rank analysis of incomplete block designs: I. the
method of paired comparisons.Biometrika, 39(3/4):324–345, 1952.
[13] Tie-Yan Liu et al. Learning to rank for information retrieval.Foundations and Trends® in
Information Retrieval, 3(3):225–331, 2009.
[14] Alexandros Karatzoglou, Linas Baltrunas, and Yue Shi. Learning to rank for recommender
systems.Proceedings of the 7th ACM conference on Recommender systems, 2013.
[15] Cheng-En Wu, Jinhong Lin, Yu Hen Hu, and Pedro Morgado. Patch ranking: Efficient clip by
learning to rank local patches, 2024.
[16] R. Duncan Luce.Individual Choice Behavior. Individual Choice Behavior. John Wiley, Oxford,
England, 1959.
[17] R. L. Plackett. The Analysis of Permutations.Journal of the Royal Statistical Society Series C:
Applied Statistics, 24(2):193–202, June 1975.
[18] Ronald J Williams. Simple statistical gradient-following algorithms for connectionist reinforce-
ment learning.Machine learning, 1992.
[19] Hengyuan Xu, Liyao Xiang, Hangyu Ye, Dixi Yao, Pengzhi Chu, and Baochun Li. Permutation
Equivariance of Transformers and Its Applications, January 2024.
[20] Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, Kai Li, and Li Fei-Fei. ImageNet: A large-
scale hierarchical image database. In2009 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, pages 248–255, June 2009.
[21] Gordon Christie, Neil Fendley, James Wilson, and Ryan Mukherjee. Functional Map of the
World. In2018 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages
6172–6180, Salt Lake City, UT, USA, June 2018. IEEE.
11
[22] Chameleon Team. Chameleon: Mixed-modal early-fusion foundation models.arXiv preprint
arXiv:2405.09818, 2024.
[23] Junzi Zhang, Jongho Kim, Brendan O’Donoghue, and Stephen Boyd. Sample Efficient Re-
inforcement Learning with REINFORCE.Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial
Intelligence, 35(12):10887–10895, May 2021.
[24] Wouter Kool, Herke van Hoof, and Max Welling. Stochastic Beams and Where to Find Them:
The Gumbel-Top-k Trick for Sampling Sequences Without Replacement, May 2019.
12
Appendix
A Discussion and Limitations
There are many details and nuances to our experiments that are worth discussing further. Particularly,
there are areas for improvements that we would like to introduce in future versions of this work.
Directional Asymmetry and ARM Interpretation.While our work primarily focuses on improv-
ing the permutation sensitivity of sequence-based vision models throughREOrder, it is important
to contextualize the architectural behavior of ARM. Although ARM’s four-directional scanning
mechanism is symmetric in principle, our experiments show that its performance varies across
different input orderings due to the anisotropic statistics of natural images and the model’s fixed
directional composition. In particular, ARM achieves higher accuracy with a row-major ordering than
with a column-major one, reflecting the stronger horizontal correlations inherent in natural scenes.
This empirical asymmetry persists despite theoretical symmetry between the two configurations,
revealing how data bias and architectural inductive bias jointly shape model behavior. Moreover,
a Hilbert-curve ordering, which maximizes spatial locality, performs significantly worse because
it disrupts ARM’s directional continuity. ARM’s recurrence dynamics are optimized for specific
scanning patterns rather than spatial adjacency alone.
REOrderaddresses these mismatches by learning an adaptive permutation of the input sequence
that jointly benefits all four directional scans. When initialized from a row-major order, it improves
validation top-1 accuracy to 58.25%, and from a column-major order to 58.58% on ImageNet-
1K. Even from a suboptimal Hilbert initialization,REOrderrecovers much of the lost performance,
reaching 53.42%. These results indicate that the learned permutations do not merely refine an existing
scan but instead adaptively reorganize the patch sequence to better align the input statistics with
ARM’s directional processing. This demonstrates thatREOrdercan serve as a practical mechanism
for reconciling architectural symmetry with anisotropic visual data.
Random baseline.A random baseline for a learned permutation baseline involves sampling a
random ordering of patches for every batch during training. We set up this baseline with Transformer-
XL on the ImageNet-1K dataset. This model achieved a maximum top-1 accuracy of 39.07% which
is 15.25 percentage points worse than the worst patch ordering tested for T-XL on IN1K (spiral).
While a random baseline should be run for every model and dataset combination, the drastically lower
performance of the random baseline gives us confidence in the veracity of our results.
Under-explored and under-tuned policy.Images with N= 196 patches have more than 10365
permutations. Searching this space exhaustively is computationally infeasible (it is estimated that
there are between 1078-1082 atoms in the observable universe—our quantity is slightly larger than
that). The Plackett-Luce policy exploration runs for a vanishingly small amount of time. The
curriculum, as tested in our experiments, is only active for 30 epochs. The majority of these epochs
is spent warming up and cooling down the Gumbel noise temperature, with the peak noise (and
therefore exploration) occurring for only one epoch. We were not able to tune these parameters due
to computational constraints. Therefore, much is left “on the table” with respect to improving results
withREOrder.
Dynamic Image Policy.A key limitation of the present work is thatREOrderlearns a single
global ordering shared across all samples within a dataset. While this design enables clean isolation
of ordering effects and ensures stable optimization, it constrains the model’s flexibility in adapting
to image-specific structures. A promising future direction is to extendREOrdertoward dynamic,
per-image ordering, where a lightweight policy network predicts ordering logits conditioned on patch
embeddings. Such an approach would allow the ordering to adapt to spatial and semantic content,
potentially capturing intra-dataset variability while preserving the benefits of learned sequencing.
Investigating the trade-offs between global stability and dynamic adaptability represents an important
next step for our future work.
Long Sequence Training.To assess scalability, we initiated experiments on ultra–high-resolution
images (5888×5888), a setting where standard ViT models exceed GPU memory limits. These
13
experiments are ongoing, and we plan to include results in future work exploring howREOrder
behaves in extended sequence regimes.
B Proof of Proposition 3.1
Theorem 1(Permutation equivariance of self -attention).Let X∈R n×d and let P∈ {0,1} n×n be
any permutation matrix. WithAttn(·)defined in Eq. (1), we have
Attn(PX) =PAttn(X).
Proof.Let
S(X) = softmax
 (XWq)(XWk)⊤
√
d

∈R n×n.
Conventionally, softmax for Attn is applied row-wise over (XWq)(XWk)⊤ so that the ensuing
multiplication by the value matrix serves as a normalized weighted sum over value columns. Since a
permutation merely re-orders rows and columns, it satisfies the conjugation property
softmax(PMP⊤) =Psoftmax(M)P ⊤ (5)
for any square matrixMand any permutation matrixM.
Then,
Attn(PX) = softmax

(PXWq)(PXWk)⊤
√
d

PXWv
= softmax

P(XWq)(XWk)⊤P⊤
√
d

PXWv
(5)
=PS(X)P ⊤ PXWv
=PS(X)XW v (P⊤P=I)
(1)
=PAttn(X).
Hence self-attention is permutation equivariant.
C Model Details
Table 1: Patch Order Models
Model Size # of Parameters Width Depth
ViT Base 86 570 728 768 12
Transformer-XL Base 93 764 584 768 12
Longformer Base 107 683 048 768 12
Mamba Base 85 036 264 768 12
ViT Large 304 330 216 1024 24
Transformer-XL Large 329 601 512 1024 24
Longformer Large 379 702 760 1024 24
Mamba Large 297 041 352 1024 24
We attempt to parameter match each model we experiment with in an effort to remove one axis of
variability from our results. We experiment with the Base variant of each model in our experiments.
Despite the intention for the Base variants to be roughly equivalent to each other, Longformer-Base
and Mamba-Base vary by ~22M parameters. To contextualize how width and depth affect the number
of parameters, we provide details for Base and Large variants in Table 1.
14
D Additional Model Training Details
Each training run required 100 epochs for completion. ImageNet experiments were run on 8× 80GB
A100 GPUs, while Functional Map of the World experiments were run on 4× 40GB A100 GPUs.
Transformer-XL, ViT and Mamba, and the Plackett-Luce policy were compiled with TorchDynamo
using the Inductor backend. The Longformer encoder provided by HuggingFace was unable to be
compiled. For ImageNet runs, Vision Transformer runs took ~8.5 hours to run, Transformer-XL runs
took ~10 hours, Longformer runs took ~12 hours, and Mamba runs took ~19 hours. For Functional
Map of the World, Vision Transformer runs took ~17.5 hours, Transformer-XL runs took ~21 hours,
Longformer runs took ~ 26 hours, and Mamba runs took ~ 31 hours. All runs were executed on
dedicated datacenters accessed remotely.
All runs nearly maximized the available VRAM on their respective GPUs. The breakdown of models
and batch sizes is provided below:
Table 2: Batch sizes for every model-dataset pairing.
Model Size Dataset Batch Size
ViT Base IN1K 896
ViT Base FMOW 448
Transformer-XL Base IN1K 640
Transformer-XL Base FMOW 320
Longformer Base IN1K 640
Longformer Base FMOW 320
Mamba Base IN1K 640
Mamba Base FMOW 320
In sum, the total set of experiments run required a total of∼9,336A100 GPU hours.
Models were trained with a minimal set of augmentations, namely: resize to 256×256 pixels, center
crop to224×224pixels, and a random horizontal flip withp= 0.50.
D.1 Increased Training Time
We continued training our Transformer-XL Row and Transformer-XLREOrderRow models from
100 epochs to 300 epochs to test the robustness of our conclusions with longer training. The models
were trained with the same recipe and learning curriculum. The gains fromREOrderare maintained
and even increased after 300 epochs. At 100 epochs (Table 3), Transformer-XL Row achieves60.80%
Top-1 Validation accuracy whereasREOrderimproves on this by 0.6 percentage points to 61.40%.
Extending training to 300 epochs, Transformer-XL Row achieves61.20%, a1.19percentage points
increase over 100 epochs; however, Transformer-XLREOrderRow, increases performance to 63.34%
which is a 2.14 percentage points increase over the Transformer-XL Row model at the same epoch.
These findings show thatREOrdercontinues to provide consistent gains under extended optimization,
supporting its robustness beyond the initial training regime.
Table 3:REOrderwidens the gap between standard models when training is extended.When
training is extended from 100 epochs to 300 epochs,REOrderstill shows significant Top-1 Validation
Accuracy gains over training withoutREOrder.
Model Dataset Patch Order RL Top-1 Validation Accuracy Gain at 300 Epochs
T-XL IN1K Row - 60.80 +1.19pp
T-XL IN1K Row✓61.40 +1.94pp
D.2 Random and Static Permutation Results
To better understand the effects of theREOrderlearning process on the performance of the models
we performed three additional runs with Transformer-XL on ImageNet-1k:
15
1. Using a fixed random permutation for the entire training
2. Sampling a random permutation for every batch through all of training
3. Using the final learn permutation of our best performingREOrderTransformer-XL model
for all of training
The results in Table 4 indicate that simply picking random patch orderings is not sufficient (and
therefore, any one random ordering will also perform poorly). The structured exploration provided
byREOrderis necessary to improve performance. A novel outcome of this exploration is that simply
using a learned patch ordering is not sufficient for gains in performance; the guided exploration
process introduced byREOrderis necessary for improved performance.
Table 4:Top-1 validation accuracy on ImageNet-1K using Transformer-XL under four alterna-
tive permutation schemes.Each variant controls how patch sequences are presented during training.
OnlyREOrder’s reinforcement-learning curriculum (second row) adaptively explores the ordering
space, leading to a large performance gain over all static or unguided random strategies.
Permutation Strategy RL Top-1 Accuracy
Row Major - 60.80
REOrderRow-major initialization✓61.40
One random permutation for all epochs - 53.10
Every batch random - 50.23
Best learned ordering - 53.07
D.3 Results Without Flips
We additionally run experiments where the only data processing steps applied are a resize to256×256
pixels and a center crop to 224×224 pixels with no flips at all. The results presented in Table 5
show the effects observed in the main experiments are maintained albeit with different accuracy
magnitudes. With no augmentations, the effect ofREOrderis even greater. All tested patch orders
exhibit performance gains when optimized byREOrder. The performance boost ranges from 1.58%
with row-major to 2.94% with the Hilbert curve ordering. Diagonal and spiral orderings get moderate
gains of 2.41% and 2.47% respectively, while column-major and snake orderings show more modest
improvements of 1.67% and 1.82% respectively. These results confirm thatREOrderconsistently
enhance task accuracy across the patch orderings even without extensive data augmentation.
Table 5:REOrder consistently improves performance across all patch orders with no augmenta-
tions.Top-1 validation accuracy on IN1K using different patch orders with and without ourREOrder
using minimal data processing (resize and center crop only).
Model Dataset Patch Order RL Top-1 Accuracy Difference
Transformer-XL IN1K Row 57.95
Transformer-XL IN1K Row✓59.53 +1.58%
Transformer-XL IN1K Column 57.33
Transformer-XL IN1K Column✓59.01 +1.67%
Transformer-XL IN1K Diagonal 52.79
Transformer-XL IN1K Diagonal✓55.20 +2.41%
Transformer-XL IN1K Hilbert 50.29
Transformer-XL IN1K Hilbert✓53.22 +2.94%
Transformer-XL IN1K Spiral 49.93
Transformer-XL IN1K Spiral✓52.40 +2.47%
Transformer-XL IN1K Snake 52.20
Transformer-XL IN1K Snake✓54.02 +1.82%
16
E Dataset Licenses and References
In this work, we use ImageNet-1K as provided by the 2012 ImageNet Large-Scale Visual Recognition
Challenge [20] and the RGB version of Functional Map of the World [21]. ImageNet-1K is obtained
from the official download portal and Functional Map of the World is obtained from their official
AWS S3 bucket.
ImageNet-1K is licensed non-commercial research and educational purposes only as described on
their homepage. Functional Map of the World is licensed under a custom version of the Creative
Commons license available on their GitHub.
F Rasterization Orders
Let an image be composed of N=H×W patches, arranged in a grid of height H (number of rows)
and width W (number of columns). Each patch is identified by its zero-indexed 2D coordinates (r, c),
where 0≤r < H and 0≤c < W . A rasterization order (or scan order) π is a bijection that maps a
1D sequence index k∈ {0,1, . . . , N−1} to the 2D coordinates of the k-th patch in the sequence.
We denote this mapping as π(k) = (r k, ck). In all cases besides row- and column-major, a direct
formula for (rk, ck) from k is not provided; the order is algorithmically defined by their respective
procedures.
F.1 Row-Major Order
Row-major order, also known as raster scan, is the most common default. Patches are scanned row by
row from top to bottom. Within each row, patches are scanned from left to right. The coordinates
(rk, ck)for thek-th patch are given by:
rk =
 k
W

ck =k(modW)
F.2 Column-Major Order
In column-major order, patches are scanned column by column from left to right. Within each column,
patches are scanned from top to bottom. The coordinates(r k, ck)for thek-th patch are given by:
ck =
 k
H

rk =k(modH)
F.3 Hilbert Curve Order
The Hilbert curve is a continuous fractal space-filling curve. Ordering patches according to a Hilbert
curve aims to preserve locality, meaning that patches close in the 1D sequence are often (but not
always perfectly) close in the 2D grid. The coordinates(r k, ck)for thek-th patch are given by:
π(k) = (r k, ck) =H H,W (k)
where HH,W (k) denotes the coordinates of the k-th point generated by a Hilbert curve algorithm
adapted for anH×Wgrid.
F.4 Spiral Order
In a spiral scan, patches are ordered in an outward spiral path, typically starting from a corner patch,
e.g., (0,0) . The path moves along the perimeter of increasingly larger (or remaining) rectangular
sections of the grid. The coordinates(r k, ck)for thek-th patch are:
π(k) = (r k, ck)
These are the k-th unique coordinates visited by a path that starts at (0,0) and spirals outwards. The
path typically moves along segments of decreasing lengths (or until a boundary or previously visited
cell is encountered) in a sequence of cardinal directions (e.g., right, down, left, up, then right again
with a shorter segment, etc.), effectively tracing successive perimeters of nested rectangles.
17
F.5 Diagonal Order (Anti-diagonal Scan)
In a diagonal scan, patches are ordered along anti-diagonals, which are lines where the sum of the
row and column indices (r+c ) is constant. These anti-diagonals are typically scanned in increasing
order of this sum, starting from r+c= 0 . Within each anti-diagonal, patches are typically ordered
by increasing row index r (or, alternatively, by increasing column indexc). The coordinates (rk, ck)
for thek-th patch are:
π(k) = (r k, ck)
such that (rk, ck) is the k-th patch when all patches (r, c) are ordered lexicographically according to
the tuple (s, r′), where s=r+c is the anti-diagonal index and r′ =r is the row index. Patches with
smaller anti-diagonal sums s come first. For patches on the same anti-diagonal (i.e., with the same s),
those with a smaller row indexr ′ come first.
F.6 Snake Order
This scan traverses patches along anti-diagonals (where the sum of row and column indices,s=r+c ,
is constant). The anti-diagonals are processed in increasing order of s. The direction of traversal
along each anti-diagonal alternates. For example, for even s, patches are visited by increasing column
indexc, and for odds, by decreasing column indexc.
Let sk =r k +c k be the anti-diagonal index for the k-th patch π(k) = (r k, ck). The sequence of
patchesπ(k)is generated by iteratingsfrom0toH+W−2. For eachs:
1. Define the set of coordinates on the anti-diagonal:Ss ={(r, c)|r+c=s,0≤r < H,0≤
c < W}.
2. Order the coordinates in Ss. For instance, by increasing column index c: Ps =
[(r0, c0),(r 1, c1), . . . ,(rm, cm)]wherec 0 < c 1 <· · ·< c m.
3. Ifsis odd (or based on an alternating flag), reverse the order ofP s.
4. Append the (potentially reversed)P s to the overall sequence.
G Attention Patterns for Tested Models
50 50 50 50 50 50 50
50 50 50 50 50 50 50
50 50 50 50 50 50 50
50 50 50 50 50 50 50
50 50 50 50 50 50 50
50 50 50 50 50 50 50
50 50 50 50 50 50 50
ViT
50 49 48 47 46 45 44
43 42 41 40 39 38 37
36 35 34 33 32 31 30
29 28 27 26 25 24 23
22 21 20 19 18 17 16
15 14 13 12 11 10 9
8 7 6 5 4 3 2
Transformer-XL
9 10 11 12 13 14 15
16 16 16 16 16 16 16
16 16 16 16 16 16 16
16 16 16 16 16 16 16
16 16 16 16 16 16 16
16 16 16 16 16 16 16
15 14 13 12 11 10 9
Longformer
50 50 50 50 50 50 50
50 50 50 50 50 50 50
50 50 50 50 50 50 50
50 50 50 50 50 50 50
50 50 50 50 50 50 50
50 50 50 50 50 50 50
50 50 50 50 50 50 50
Mamba
Figure 6:Token-level attention coverage across different model architectures.Each grid cell
represents a patch in a 224×224 input image split into 49 non-overlapping 32×32 patches, plus a
[CLS] token. Numbers indicate how many tokens attend to each patch. ViT and Mamba exhibit
full attention to all patches. In contrast, Transformer-XL’s causal attention and Longformer’s local
attention restrict the number of tokens that can attend to each patch, leading to a strong asymmetry
and localized attention, respectively.
To produce Figure 6, we visualized how many tokens attend to each patch in a 224 ×224 image
divided into 49 patches (plus a[CLS]token), using the following methods for each model.
ViT and Transformer-XL:We extracted the raw attention weights across all layers and heads
during a forward pass. After computing the element-wise maximum across layers and heads, we
obtained a binary N×N matrix indicating whether token i attends to token j. Summing over rows
yields how many tokens attend to each patch.
18
Longformer:Due to its local attention structure, we reconstructed a dense N×N attention matrix
by extracting local and (if applicable) global attention indices. We then counted how many tokens
had access to each patch through these sparse connections.
Mamba:Since Mamba does not use attention, we used a gradient-based saliency method. We
computed the gradient of the L2 norm of each output token with respect to the input embeddings. This
yielded a sensitivity matrix indicating the influence of each input token on each output. Thresholding
non-zero entries allows us to analogously count how many tokens “attend” to each patch.
These results reveal how the structural design of each model affects its ability to aggregate spatial
information. ViT and Mamba attend to all patches uniformly, while Transformer-XL’s causal structure
and Longformer’s locality lead to uneven and limited attention coverage. These patterns explain their
respective sensitivities to input token ordering.
H Policy Evolution During Training
Column
Row
Epoch 15 Epoch 22 Epoch 30 Epoch 37 Epoch 44
Figure 7:Mamba observes patches most related to the class label move to the end of the sequence.Mamba
is trained with column- (top) and row-major (bottom) patch orderings and optimized withREOrder. The image
is of the class “keyboard.” We track two patches over the course of the policy curriculum: a keyboard key (light
red arrow) and an irrelevant orange beak (dark red arrow). As training progresses, the keyboard-related patches
shift into the final indices of the sequence.
TheREOrderpolicy learned distinct and consistent rearrangements of image patches that reflect
both dataset structure and model-specific inductive biases. As seen in the “keyboard” example from
Column
Row
Epoch 15 Epoch 22 Epoch 30 Epoch 37 Epoch 44
Figure 8:Transformer-XL observes patches most related to the class label move to the end of the sequence.
Transformer-XL is initialized with column- (top) and row-major (bottom) patch orderings and optimized with
REOrder. The image is of the class “keyboard.” We track two patches over the course of the policy curriculum:
a keyboard key (light red arrow) and an irrelevant orange beak (dark red arrow). As training progresses, the
keyboard-related patches shift into the final indices of the sequence.
19
Figure 5,REOrderprogressively shifts semantically important patches toward specific sequence
positions, indicating that the learned permutations encode spatial continuity and capture architectural
preferences in how visual information should be processed.
To quantify these effects, we analyzed howREOrderrepositions patches originating from the central
region of an image relative to their initial raster order. Both ImageNet-1K and FMoW exhibit a
pronounced center bias, where salient content typically lies near the image’s center. We observed that
REOrderwith different long-sequence architectures exploit this bias in distinct ways.
Mamba consistently front-loads central patches, shifting them earlier in the sequence (mean shift of
+6.8 positions). This ordering aligns with Mamba’s recurrent state-space mechanism as processing
salient central regions early allows the model to form a strong initial hidden state that informs
subsequent token processing.
Transformer-XL and Longformer exhibit the opposite tendency, back-loading central patches (average
shifts of −2.2 and −20.4 positions, respectively). For Transformer-XL, this allows these tokens
to utilize information from the entire image rather than only from half of it. For Longformer, the
attention window accumulates context over the sequence which positioning maximizes contextual
support from earlier tokens for the salient tokens.
This contrast demonstrates thatREOrderdoes not converge to a trivial or dataset-wide ordering.
Instead, it learns model-dependent strategies that align spatial inductive biases with sequence-
processing dynamics, revealing that ordering optimization can adapt meaningfully to the architecture’s
internal computation pattern.
20